README.md, before:

# Icon Generator for Alfred Bundler #

This is a backend server for the [Alfred Bundler][alfred-bundler].

It generates icons from webfonts that contain icons instead of letters, such as [Font Awesome][font-awesome]. (It can of course also generate icons from fonts that contain normal letters.)

It is built with Python and Flask and designed to run as a WSGI application behind a proper web server.

## Installation ##

Clone the repository and run `setup.sh` in the root directory. This will create the virtualenv and install the necessary dependencies (from `requirements.txt`) with `pip`. **Note**: The [Pillow library][pillow] is required, so please ensure that your system has [the libraries required][pillow-install] to compile Pillow. (The `*-dev` libraries can be removed after installation.)

## Configuration ##

After installation you **must** edit `siteconfig.py`. This file is not included in the repo, but is created by `setup.sh` (a copy of `siteconfig.sample.py`. It overrides the settings in `config.py`. At minimum, you must override `MAX_CACHE_SIZE` to a non-zero number, or the application will not run.

The server includes the [Font Awesome][font-awesome], [Elusive Icons][elusive-icons] and [Typicons][typicons] fonts and corresponding JSON configuration files and CSS files.

To add a new font, add the webfont files (TTF, WOFF etc.) to the `iconserver/static/fonts` directory, the CSS file for the webfont (which defines the classes for each icon/character) to `iconserver/static/css` and create a corresponding JSON configuration file in `/fonts`.

Such a configuration file looks like this:

```
{
 "id": "fontawesome",
  "name": "Font Awesome",
  "ttf": "fontawesome-webfont.ttf",
  "credit": "Dave Gandy",
  "url": "http://fortawesome.github.io/Font-Awesome/",
  "licence": "http://scripts.sil.org/OFL",
  "css": "font-awesome.css",
  "cssclass": "fa fa-{name}",
  "characters": {
    "adjust": "f042",
    "adn": "f170",
    "align-center": "f037",
    "align-justify": "f039",
    "align-left": "f036",
    "align-right": "f038",
    "ambulance": "f0f9",
    "anchor": "f13d",
    "android": "f17b",
    …
    …
  }
}
```

All values are required. Their meaning is as follows:

|     Key      |                                                                                     Meaning                                                                                     |
|--------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `id`         | URL-friendly name of the font. **Must** be lowercase, e.g. `fontawesome`, `elusive`                                                                                             |
| `name`       | User-friendly name  of the font, e.g. `Font Awesome`, `Elusive Icons`                                                                                                           |
| `ttf`        | The filename, not the path, of the TTF file. The file must be in the `iconserver/static/fonts` directory, e.g. `Elusive-Icons.ttf`                                              |
| `credit`     | The person/company who created the font. Shown on the preview page, e.g. `Aristeides Stathopoulos`, `Dave Gandy`                                                                |
| `url`        | The URL of the author's homepage. Shown on the preview page, e.g. `http://fortawesome.github.io/Font-Awesome/`, `http://typicons.com/`                                          |
| `licence`    | The URL of the font's licence, e.g. `http://scripts.sil.org/OFL`                                                                                                                |
| `css`        | The filename, not the path, of the font's CSS file. The file must be in the `iconserver/static/css` directory, e.g. `typicons.css`, `font-awesome.css`                          |
| `cssclass`   | A template for the CSS class that should be applied to the `span` element showing the character preview. `{name}` will be replaced with the character name, e.g. `fa fa-{name}` |
| `characters` | A mapping of the character names to the hex Unicode codepoint, e.g. `e600`, `f01d`. What you would use in CSS as `\<value>` or in Python as `\u<value>`                         |

The JSON file can usually be created easily enough from the font's CSS file (Sublime Text's multiple cursors are a big help here).

To make it a little easier, you can instead generate a TSV file with each line containing the name and the Unicode codepoint of a character, and use the `extra/generate.py` script to generate the JSON `characters` mapping from that.

In most cases, the CSS file for the font will need editing to set the `font-size` to `48px`. The `line-height` attribute may also need changing. See the included CSS files for examples.

## API ##

The API is very simple:

```
http://www.example.com/icon/<fontname>/<csscolour>/<character-name>[/<size>][.png]
```
`fontname`, `csscolour` and `character-name` are mandatory. `size` is optional, as is the `.png` extension.

`fontname` corresponds to the `id` value in the JSON configuration file, `csscolour` is a CSS colour of `xxx` or `xxxxxx` form (without preceding `#`), and `character-name` is the name of a character as specified in the JSON configuration file. `size` is the size of the icon in pixels (all icons are square).

`csscolour` is case-insensitive and may be 3 or 6 characters long.

If `size` is not specified, the value of `SIZE` set in `config.py` or `siteconfig.py` will be used. If `API_ALLOW_SIZE` is set to `False`, the `size` parameter will be ignored and `SIZE` will be used.

All icons are in PNG format. You may append `.png` to the URL if you need to.

The `/icon` endpoint will 302 redirect the client to the static path of the requested icon, generating the icon first if necessary. By default this is the URL `http://www.example.com/static/icons/<fontname>/<colour>/<character-name>-<size>.png`, corresponding to the directory tree under `iconserver/static/icons`.

You can alter the directory icons are saved to and the corresponding URL with the `CACHEDIR` and `CACHEURL` options in `siteconfig.py` (overriding the defaults in `config.py`).

If `CACHEDIR` and `CACHEURL` are specified, they will be used thus: `(CACHEDIR|CACHEURL)/<fontname>/<colour>/<character-name>.png`.

All arguments are converted to lowercase and the colour is normalised to the 6-character form to ensure each icon is only generated and cached once.

### Examples ###

```
http://www.example.com/icon/fontawesome/fff/beer
http://www.example.com/icon/fontawesome/F0F0F0/beer.png
http://www.example.com/icon/elusive/010101/briefcase
http://www.example.com/icon/elusive/000/podcast/1024
```

## Maintenance ##

The application itself does not monitor or manage the cache size, but the `extra/purge_cache.py` script will reduce the size of the icon cache to 50% of the `MAX_CACHE_SIZE` you've specified in `siteconfig.py`, preferentially deleting the least recently-accessed icons.

Call it with `extra/purge_cache.py path/to/icon/cache/directory` (by default `iconserver/static/icons`) from `cron`.

It will delete the least recently-accessed icons and then remove any empty directories.

## Licence, Thanks ##

This code is made available under the [MIT Licence][mit-licence]. The bundled fonts are released under the [SIL Open Font Licence (OFL)][sil-licence].

It goes without saying that this app would be both pointless and impossible without the awesome work of the fonts' creators.

|              Font              |          Author         |
|--------------------------------|-------------------------|
| [Elusive Icons][elusive-icons] | Aristeides Stathopoulos |
| [Font Awesome][font-awesome]   | Dave Gandy              |
| [Typicons][typicons]           | Stephen Hutchings       |

## Notes ##

I've tried several other webfonts with this application with lesser or greater success. [Entypo/Entypo Social](http://www.entypo.com/) in particular do not work.


[font-awesome]: http://fortawesome.github.io/Font-Awesome/
[elusive-icons]: https://github.com/aristath/elusive-iconfont
[typicons]: http://typicons.com/
[mit-licence]: http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT
[sil-licence]: http://scripts.sil.org/OFL
[pillow]: http://pillow.readthedocs.org/en/latest/index.html
[pillow-install]: http://pillow.readthedocs.org/en/latest/installation.html

Commit message:

Add link to icon pack repo

README.md, after:

# Icon Generator for Alfred Bundler #

This is a backend server for the [Alfred Bundler][alfred-bundler].

It generates icons from webfonts that contain icons instead of letters, such as [Font Awesome][font-awesome]. (It can of course also generate icons from fonts that contain normal letters.)

It is built with Python and Flask and designed to run as a WSGI application behind a proper web server.

## Installation ##

Clone the repository and run `setup.sh` in the root directory. This will create the virtualenv and install the necessary dependencies (from `requirements.txt`) with `pip`. **Note**: The [Pillow library][pillow] is required, so please ensure that your system has [the libraries required][pillow-install] to compile Pillow. (The `*-dev` libraries can be removed after installation.)

## Configuration ##

After installation you **must** edit `siteconfig.py`. This file is not included in the repo, but is created by `setup.sh` (a copy of `siteconfig.sample.py`. It overrides the settings in `config.py`. At minimum, you must override `MAX_CACHE_SIZE` to a non-zero number, or the application will not run.

The server includes the [Font Awesome][font-awesome], [Elusive Icons][elusive-icons] and [Typicons][typicons] fonts and corresponding JSON configuration files and CSS files.

To add a new font, add the webfont files (TTF, WOFF etc.) to the `iconserver/static/fonts` directory, the CSS file for the webfont (which defines the classes for each icon/character) to `iconserver/static/css` and create a corresponding JSON configuration file in `/fonts`.

Such a configuration file looks like this:

```
{
 "id": "fontawesome",
  "name": "Font Awesome",
  "ttf": "fontawesome-webfont.ttf",
  "credit": "Dave Gandy",
  "url": "http://fortawesome.github.io/Font-Awesome/",
  "licence": "http://scripts.sil.org/OFL",
  "css": "font-awesome.css",
  "cssclass": "fa fa-{name}",
  "characters": {
    "adjust": "f042",
    "adn": "f170",
    "align-center": "f037",
    "align-justify": "f039",
    "align-left": "f036",
    "align-right": "f038",
    "ambulance": "f0f9",
    "anchor": "f13d",
    "android": "f17b",
    …
    …
  }
}
```

All values are required. Their meaning is as follows:

|     Key      |                                                                                     Meaning                                                                                     |
|--------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `id`         | URL-friendly name of the font. **Must** be lowercase, e.g. `fontawesome`, `elusive`                                                                                             |
| `name`       | User-friendly name  of the font, e.g. `Font Awesome`, `Elusive Icons`                                                                                                           |
| `ttf`        | The filename, not the path, of the TTF file. The file must be in the `iconserver/static/fonts` directory, e.g. `Elusive-Icons.ttf`                                              |
| `credit`     | The person/company who created the font. Shown on the preview page, e.g. `Aristeides Stathopoulos`, `Dave Gandy`                                                                |
| `url`        | The URL of the author's homepage. Shown on the preview page, e.g. `http://fortawesome.github.io/Font-Awesome/`, `http://typicons.com/`                                          |
| `licence`    | The URL of the font's licence, e.g. `http://scripts.sil.org/OFL`                                                                                                                |
| `css`        | The filename, not the path, of the font's CSS file. The file must be in the `iconserver/static/css` directory, e.g. `typicons.css`, `font-awesome.css`                          |
| `cssclass`   | A template for the CSS class that should be applied to the `span` element showing the character preview. `{name}` will be replaced with the character name, e.g. `fa fa-{name}` |
| `characters` | A mapping of the character names to the hex Unicode codepoint, e.g. `e600`, `f01d`. What you would use in CSS as `\<value>` or in Python as `\u<value>`                         |

The JSON file can usually be created easily enough from the font's CSS file (Sublime Text's multiple cursors are a big help here).

To make it a little easier, you can instead generate a TSV file with each line containing the name and the Unicode codepoint of a character, and use the `extra/generate.py` script to generate the JSON `characters` mapping from that.

In most cases, the CSS file for the font will need editing to set the `font-size` to `48px`. The `line-height` attribute may also need changing. See the included CSS files for examples.

## API ##

The API is very simple:

```
http://www.example.com/icon/<fontname>/<csscolour>/<character-name>[/<size>][.png]
```
`fontname`, `csscolour` and `character-name` are mandatory. `size` is optional, as is the `.png` extension.

`fontname` corresponds to the `id` value in the JSON configuration file, `csscolour` is a CSS colour of `xxx` or `xxxxxx` form (without preceding `#`), and `character-name` is the name of a character as specified in the JSON configuration file. `size` is the size of the icon in pixels (all icons are square).

`csscolour` is case-insensitive and may be 3 or 6 characters long.

If `size` is not specified, the value of `SIZE` set in `config.py` or `siteconfig.py` will be used. If `API_ALLOW_SIZE` is set to `False`, the `size` parameter will be ignored and `SIZE` will be used.

All icons are in PNG format. You may append `.png` to the URL if you need to.

The `/icon` endpoint will 302 redirect the client to the static path of the requested icon, generating the icon first if necessary. By default this is the URL `http://www.example.com/static/icons/<fontname>/<colour>/<character-name>-<size>.png`, corresponding to the directory tree under `iconserver/static/icons`.

You can alter the directory icons are saved to and the corresponding URL with the `CACHEDIR` and `CACHEURL` options in `siteconfig.py` (overriding the defaults in `config.py`).

If `CACHEDIR` and `CACHEURL` are specified, they will be used thus: `(CACHEDIR|CACHEURL)/<fontname>/<colour>/<character-name>.png`.

All arguments are converted to lowercase and the colour is normalised to the 6-character form to ensure each icon is only generated and cached once.

### Examples ###

```
http://www.example.com/icon/fontawesome/fff/beer
http://www.example.com/icon/fontawesome/F0F0F0/beer.png
http://www.example.com/icon/elusive/010101/briefcase
http://www.example.com/icon/elusive/000/podcast/1024
```

## Maintenance ##

The application itself does not monitor or manage the cache size, but the `extra/purge_cache.py` script will reduce the size of the icon cache to 50% of the `MAX_CACHE_SIZE` you've specified in `siteconfig.py`, preferentially deleting the least recently-accessed icons.

Call it with `extra/purge_cache.py path/to/icon/cache/directory` (by default `iconserver/static/icons`) from `cron`.

It will delete the least recently-accessed icons and then remove any empty directories.


## Icon fonts ##

The following fonts are included with the server:

- [Elusive Icons][elusive-icons]
- [Font Awesome][font-awesome]
- [Typicons][typicons]

Some additional fonts, including GitHub's Octicons and Material Design, can be downloaded from the [icon pack repo][icon-packs].


## Licence and thanks ##

This code is made available under the [MIT Licence][mit-licence]. The bundled fonts are released under the [SIL Open Font Licence (OFL)][sil-licence].

It goes without saying that this app would be both pointless and impossible without the awesome work of the fonts' creators.

|              Font              |          Author         |
|--------------------------------|-------------------------|
| [Elusive Icons][elusive-icons] | Aristeides Stathopoulos |
| [Font Awesome][font-awesome]   | Dave Gandy              |
| [Typicons][typicons]           | Stephen Hutchings       |

## Notes ##

I've tried several other webfonts with this application with lesser or greater success. [Entypo/Entypo Social](http://www.entypo.com/) in particular do not work.


[font-awesome]: http://fortawesome.github.io/Font-Awesome/
[elusive-icons]: https://github.com/aristath/elusive-iconfont
[icon-packs]: https://github.com/deanishe/bundler-icon-server-iconpacks
[typicons]: http://typicons.com/
[mit-licence]: http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT
[sil-licence]: http://scripts.sil.org/OFL
[pillow]: http://pillow.readthedocs.org/en/latest/index.html
[pillow-install]: http://pillow.readthedocs.org/en/latest/installation.html
